ePBS specs (#1)
terencechain/consensus-specs: specs/_features/ePBS/p2p-interface.md

The new topics along with the type of the `data` field of a gossipsub message are given in this table:

| Name | Message Type |
| - | - |
| `builder_bid` | `SignedBuilderBid`|
| `execution_payload` | `ExecutionPayload`|
| `execution_attestation` | `ExecutionAttestation` [New in ePBS]

##### Global topics

ePBS introduces new global topics for blob sidecars.

###### `beacon_block`

The *type* of the payload of this topic changes to the (modified) `SignedBeaconBlockWithBid` found in ePBS spec. Specifically, this type changes with the replacement of `SignedBuilderBid` to the inner `BeaconBlockBody`.

In addition to the gossip validations for this topic from prior specifications, the following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `signed_beacon_block` on the network. Alias `block = signed_beacon_block.message`, `signed_bid = block.body.signed_builder_bid`, `bid = signed_bid.message`, `header = bid.header`.

New validation:

- _[REJECT]_ The block's execution header timestamp is correct with respect to the slot -- i.e. `header.timestamp == compute_timestamp_at_slot(state, block.slot)`.
- _[REJECT]_ The bid pubkey is a valid builder in state.

> - _[REJECT]_ The builder has sufficient balances to pay for the bid.

Reviewer: how would this be validated? won't this require access to execution state?

Author: Bid payment is happening at consensus, not execution. @potuz should have a consensus spec soon

- _[REJECT]_ The builder signature, `signed_bid.signature`, is valid with respect to the `bid.pubkey`.

###### `execution_payload`

This topic is used to propagate execution payload.

The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `execution_payload` on the network, assuming the alias `payload = execution_payload`:

> - _[IGNORE]_ The payload aligns with header that received in block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _[IGNORE]_ The hash tree root of the payload matches the hash tree root of a payload header received previously on the `beacon_block` topic
```

- _[REJECT]_ The validator index is within the execution committee in `get_execution_committee(state, data.slot)`
- _[IGNORE]_ The execution payload being voted for (`data.execution_hash`) has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue execution attestations for processing once payload is retrieved).
- _[REJECT]_ The signature of `execution_attestation` is valid.

###### `builder_bid`

This topic is used to propagate signed builder bids.

The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `signed_builder_bid` on the network, assuming the alias `bid = signed_builder_bid.message`:

- _[REJECT]_ The signed builder bid pubkey, `bid.pubkey`, exists in state.
- _[IGNORE]_ The signed builder bid value, `bid.value`, is less than builder's balance in state.
- _[IGNORE]_ The signed builder header timestamp is correct with respect to next slot -- i.e. `header.timestamp == compute_timestamp_at_slot(state, current_slot + 1)`.

> - _[IGNORE]_ The signed builder header parent block has matches one of the chain tip in the fork choice store. Builder may submit multiple bids with respect to forks.

Reviewer 2: We have to allow building on any viable block in the DAG or it can cause liveness issues. The builder's beacon node may require to fork an existing tip

Author: Yeah. That's fine. The comment is saying the builder's bid has to build on a parent block hash that is seen. Perhaps I should rephrase it differently

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _[IGNORE]_ The signed builder header parent block matches one of the chain tip(s) in the fork choice store. Builder may submit multiple bids corresponding to various forks.
```

> - _[REJECT]_ The builder signature, `signed_bid.signature`, is valid with respect to the `bid.pubkey`.

Reviewer 2: each builder can publish an unbounded number of bids. How can we bound it? I would start by requiring increasing bids amounts to be at least % higher than previous

Author: I am tempted to say we only allow one bid per builder per fork

Reviewer: +1 reject bids on same fork

Reviewer 2: If ePBS does not allow all features wanted by builders they will bypass ePBS and use side-channels. Re-bidding is key IMO, see current usage of mev-boost https://payload.de/data/

Reviewer: wow pretty interesting visualization, i guess re-bids with at least 10% increase would makes sense similar to tx acceptance

#### Transitioning the gossip

See gossip transition details found in the [Altair document](../altair/p2p-interface.md#transitioning-the-gossip) for
details on how to handle transitioning gossip topics for this upgrade.

> ### The Req/Resp domain

Reviewer 2: Block by root and by range will propagate full blocks (`SignedBeaconBlock`) or blinded blocks `SignedBeaconBlockWithBid`

Author: This is a good question and I admit I haven't thought much on. 
I think by range requires no changes. It's applied to finalized blocks anyway
By root is tricky, we might want to add a `signed_blinded_block_by_root` method

Reviewer: not sure why would signed by root be required for blinded  except for those on the tip, but should be pickedup from gossip, anything missed from gossip can't be synced next slot by the time the payload is revealed (assuming that this ePBS scheme has payload reveal before last interval of the slot)

Reviewer 3: I think the notion of "full block" dissappears on ePBS. You request blocks and payloads separated, there's very little need to assemble a full block except for validation in which you get the two lists anyway as they perform separate state transitions on the beacon state.

      - [Topics and messages](#topics-and-messages)
        - [Global topics](#global-topics)
          - [`beacon_block`](#beacon_block)
          - [`execution_payload`](#execution_payload)
          - [`payload_attestation_message`](#payload_attestation_message)
          - [`execution_payload_header`](#execution_payload_header)
          - [`inclusion_list`](#inclusion_list)
      - [Transitioning the gossip](#transitioning-the-gossip)
    - [The Req/Resp domain](#the-reqresp-domain)
      - [Messages](#messages)
        - [](#)
        - [ExecutionPayloadEnvelopeByRoot v1](#executionpayloadenvelopebyroot-v1)
        - [NetworkBlockByRange v1](#networkblockbyrange-v1)
        - [NetworkBlockByRoot v1](#networkblockbyroot-v1)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# ePBS -- Networking

This document contains the consensus-layer networking specification for ePBS.

The specification of these changes continues in the same format as the network specifications of previous upgrades, and assumes them as pre-requisite.

## Table of contents

### Containers

#### `SignedNetworkBlock`

*[New in ePBS]*

```python

> class SignedNetworkBlock(Container):

Reviewer 3: What is this?

Author: For syncing. It's a network wrapper. I'll add a design rationale for this today

New validation:

- _[REJECT]_ The block's execution header timestamp is correct with respect to the slot -- i.e. `header.timestamp == compute_timestamp_at_slot(state, block.slot)`.
- _[REJECT]_ The header's builder index is a valid builder in state. 
- _[REJECT]_ The builder has sufficient balances to pay for the bid. i.e. `BUILDER_MIN_BALANCE + header.value < state.builder_balances[header.builder_index]`.
- _[REJECT]_ The builder signature, `signed_header.signature`, is valid with respect to the builder's public key.

###### `execution_payload`

This topic is used to propagate execution payload envelope `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope`.

The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `signed_execution_payload_envelope` on the network, assuming the alias `payload_envelope = signed_execution_payload_envelope.message`, `payload = payload_envelope.message.payload`:

- _[IGNORE]_ The envelope's block root `payload_envelope.block_root` has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue payload for processing once the block is retrieved).

> - _[IGNORE]_ The hash tree root of the `payload` in `payload_envelope` matches the hash tree root of a payload header received previously on the `beacon_block` topic.

Reviewer 3: this should be a reject

> - _[IGNORE]_ The builder index of the `payload_envelope` matches the payload header received previously on the `beacon_block` topic.

Reviewer 3: this should be a reject

- _[REJECT]_ The builder signature, `signed_execution_payload_envelope.signature`, is valid with respect to the builder's public key.

###### `payload_attestation_message`

This topic is used to propagate signed payload attestation message.

The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `payload_attestation_message` on the network, assuming the alias `data = payload_attestation_message.data`:

- _[IGNORE]_ `data.slot` is within the last `ATTESTATION_PROPAGATION_SLOT_RANGE` slots (with a MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY allowance) -- i.e. `data.slot` + `ATTESTATION_PROPAGATION_SLOT_RANGE` >= `current_slot` >= `data.slot` (a client MAY queue future aggregates for processing at the appropriate slot).

> - _[IGNORE]_ The attestation's `data.block_root` has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue attestation for processing once the block is retrieved. Note a client might want to request payload after).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- _[IGNORE]_ The attestation's `data.beacon_block_root` has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue attestation for processing once the block is retrieved. Note a client might want to request payload after).
```

> - _[REJECT]_ The validator index is within the payload committee in `get_ptc(state, slot)`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- _[REJECT]_ The validator index is within the payload committee in `get_ptc(state, data.slot)`.
```

- _[IGNORE]_ The signed builder bid value, `header_envelope.value`, is less than the builder minimum balance in state.  i.e. `MIN_BUILDER_BALANCE + header.value < state.builder_balances[header.builder_index]`.
- _[IGNORE]_ The signed builder header timestamp is correct with respect to next slot -- i.e. `header.timestamp == compute_timestamp_at_slot(state, current_slot + 1)`.
- _[IGNORE]_ The signed builder header parent block matches one of the chain tip(s) in the fork choice store. Builder may submit multiple bids corresponding to various forks.
- _[REJECT]_ The builder signature, `signed_execution_payload_header_envelope.signature`, is valid with respect to the `header_envelope.builder_index`.

###### `inclusion_list`

This topic is used to propagate inclusion list.

The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `inclusion_list` on the network, assuming the alias `signed_summary = inclusion_list.summary`, `summary = signed_summary.message`:

- _[REJECT]_ The inclusion list transactions `inclusion_list.transactions` length is within upperbound `MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_INCLUSION_LIST`.

> - _[REJECT]_ The inclusion list summery has the same length of transactions `len(summary.summary) == len(inclusion_list.transactions)`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- _[REJECT]_ The inclusion list summary has the same length of transactions `len(summary.summary) == len(inclusion_list.transactions)`.
```
